we've all heard the old saying but we
know more about space than we do about
the oceans beneath our feet even as we
push the boundaries of exploration it
still holds true more people have walked
on the surface of the Moon that have
visited the deepest parts of the city
those few that have however made a
startling discovery there's a whole lot
of life down there you might wonder why
that's a surprising for a long time we
thought that the ocean deep was barren
Victorian scientist Edward Forbes
dredged the ocean floor and found that
the deeper he went the less he found
concluding that simply nothing could
survive below around 550 meters but that
theory was blown out of the water when
strange deep-sea animals called sea
lilies were found three kilometers down
below the Norwegian fjords in the mid
1860s but it was becoming clear that the
deeper you go the tougher it gets first
start all that water above you exerts a
massive pressure increasing by one
atmosphere every 10 meters of depth in
the deepest parts of the ocean the
pressure is more than a thousand times
what we experienced sea level and can
crush submarines like tin cans it's also
completely and utterly dark down there
light from the Sun only usually
penetrates the ocean to a depth of
around 200 metres beneath this depth
it's like one long night and no sunlight
also means no heat with water
temperatures between minus 1 & 4 degrees
Celsius the cold crushing dark waters of
the ocean depths are some of the most
inhospitable on earth so it really was a
surprise when the first visitors to the
Challenger Deep the deepest place in all
of the oceans found it to be teeming
with life just how the animals that live
there survive pressure is a problem for
us and other air-breathing animals
because some parts of our bodies are
filled with air like our lungs in the
ear and nasal cavities at extreme depth
this air is tightly compressed and the
structures that surround them are
damaged beyond repair
animals that frequently dive between the
surface and the deep like sperm whales
have evolved ways of dealing with this
by swelling the veins in their ears and
nose to fill the gaps and even
collapsing their lungs to drive out the
air creatures that live at constantly
crushing pressures just do away with the
air spaces altogether but even so they
face the threat of the intense cold and
pressure solidifying the fats that make
up their cell membranes and crushing the
proteins that are important for their
metabolism to avoid this the cell
membranes are made out of lots of
unsaturated fats which is the same
structure as in vegetable oil to help
them stay liquid at very cold
temperatures plus the cells collect
small organic compounds called piezo
lights which reinforce the proteins and
stop the water pressure from squashing
them and interestingly one type of Pisa
light called TMAO
is what makes fish smell fishy so
deep-sea fish have more TMAO which means
they smell fishier than shallow water
fish but Pisa lights also make the
inside of the cell salty too many of
these molecules make the cell saltier
than the sea water outside meaning it
will rush into balance the concentration
bursting the cells for this reason there
is a limit to the depths that fish can
live which is about 8.2 kilometres at
the bottom of the Challenger deep at
depths of nearly 11 kilometers there may
be no fish but there is life giant
shrimp like amphipods oversized
single-celled organisms with shells made
of glued together sand and sea cucumbers
half buried in the mud while the
amphipods were found to have some Pisa
lights in their cells it's still
something of a mystery as to how these
weird and wonderful creatures can take
the pressure even when organisms have
found ways to cope with intense pressure
there's still the problem of finding
enough food to survive the intense
darkness means that no photosynthesis is
possible and even moderate depths in the
ocean so you won't find any seaweed
tickling your feet down there instead
animals must find their nutrition
elsewhere one of the most common food
sources is what's delightfully called
marine snow and is less delightfully
defined as a constant fine rain of dead
stuff
the upper layers to the bottom of the
ocean animals living at depth like sea
whip corals sea pens and giant sponges
opted for massive size or elaborate
tendrils to help them intercept as much
snow as possible as it drifts past and
occasionally the mother lode comes along
in the shape of a dead whale whale falls
like this are a feeding frenzy
attracting animals like hagfish and
sleeper sharks from miles around within
just 18 months a 30-ton gray whale
carcass could be stripped bare by
hundreds of different animals many of
which have never been found elsewhere in
the ocean for those that prefer
something more freshly dead hunting in
the pitch-black emptyness requires some
very special adaptations deep-sea
anglers use bioluminescent lures that
glow in the dark to attract curious prey
viciously sharp teeth must be able to
cope with whatever is drawn to the lure
so they're often oversized like the fine
toothed which can't even close its mouth
properly and there is one more
unexpected source of nutrition at the
bottom of the ocean volcanoes erupting
beneath the water and not only provide
heat a temporary relief from the frigid
water but they also deliver nutrients in
abundance at so-called
black smokers these hydrothermal vents
throw out sulfur rich minerals that can
fuel chemosynthetic bacteria which use
chemical energy the same way plants and
other photosynthesizers use light energy
these in turn support a weird-lookin
community of tubeworms and blind shrimp
among many others events like these are
so productive that some scientists think
that these remarkable underwater oases
could have been where life actually
started billions of years ago so far
from being barren of life like we once
believed certain parts of the deep
oceans may actually represent the cradle
of life itself which is quite frankly
awesome if you're wondering how you'd
manage living underwater check out
Greg's video over on BBC Earth loud and
let me know what your favorite deep-sea
creature is in the comments below
give us a like and if you're new click
subscribe for more science and nature
videos from Earth unplugged
bye for now